# Ch-1 Introduction to TCP/IP Networking

- Networks work correctly because the various devices and software follow the rules. Those rules come in the form of standards and protocols, which are agreements of a particular part of how a network should work.
- Networking models define a structure and different categories (layers) of standards and protocols. The networking model defines ruls about how each part of the network should work, as well as how the parts should work together so that the entire network functions correctly.
- The IT world refers to a network created by one corporation, or enterprise, for the purpose of allowing its employees to communicate as an enterprise network. The smaller networks at home, when used for business purposes, often go by the name small office/home office networks (SOHO).
- A networking model, sometimes also called either a networking architecture or networking blueprint, refers to a comprehensive set of documents. Individually each document describes one small function required for the network; collectively, these documents define everything that should happen for a computer network to work.
- Today, the world of computer networking uses one networking model: TCP/IP.
- The TCP/IP model both defines and references a large collection of protocols that allow computers to communicate. To define a protocol, TCP/IP uses documents called Requests For Comments.
- To understand a networking model, each model breaks the functions into a small number of categories called layers. Each layers includes protocols and standards that relate to that category of functions. [TCP/IP Model](https://postimg.cc/SJpXXsVN)
- TCP/IP application layer protocols provide services to the application software running on a computer. The application layer does not define the application itself, but it defines services that applications need. In short the application layer provides an interface between software running on the computer and the network itself.
- To make the request for a web page and return the contents of the web page, the applications use the Hypertext Transfer Protocol.
- The two most commonly used transport layer protocols are the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and User Datagram Protocol (UDP). Transport layer protocols provide services to the application layer protocols that reside one layer higher in the TCP/IP model.
- Adjacent layer interaction which refers to the concepts of how adjacent layers in networking model, on the same computer work together. When a particular layer on one computer wants to communicate with the same layer on another computer, the two computers use headers to hold the information that they want to communicate.
- The TCP/IP network layer includes a small number of protocols but only one major protocol: the Internet Protocol (IP). IP provides several features, most importantly, addressing and routing. IP defines that each host computer should have different IP address, IP defines the process of routing so that devices called routers can forward packets of data so that they are delivered to the correct destinations.
- IP defines addresses for several important reason. First each device that uses TCP/IP - each TCP/IP host - needs a unique address so that it can be identified in the network. IP also defines how to group addresses together.
- The TCP/IP model's data-link and physical layers define the protocols and hardware required to deliver data across some physical network. The two work together quite closely; in fact, some standards define both the data-link and physical layer functions. The physical layer defines the cabling and energy that flow over the cables. Some rules and conventions exist when sending data over the cable; however those rule exist in the data link layer of the TCP/IP model.
- In short, the TCP/IP physical and data-link layer include two distinct functions, respectively: functions related to the physical transmission of the data, plus the protocols and rules that control the use of the physical media.
- The term encapsulation refers to the process of putting headers (and sometimes trailers) around some data. [Data Encapsulation](https://postimg.cc/JHrYJ3p8)
- [Names of TCP/IP Messages](https://postimg.cc/3y827KJL)
- [OSI vs TCP/IP](https://postimg.cc/SYmv0ntg) [OSI Encapsulation](https://postimg.cc/JHrtyWhp)
