# Fundamentals of Ethernet LANs

- LANs typically connect nearby devices: devices in the same room, in the same building, or in a campus of buildings. In contrast, WANs connect devices that are typically relaively far apart.
- Many types of LANs have existed over the years, but today's networks use two general types of LANs: Ethernet LANs and Wireless LANs. Ethernet LANs are often called wired LANs. Wireless LANs do not use wires or cables, instead using radio waves for the links between nodes.
- The term _Ethernet_ refers to a family of LAN standards that together define the physical and data-link layers of the world's most popular wired LAN technology.
- First, the LAN needs a device called the Ethernet LAN switch, which provids many physical ports into which cables can be connected. An Ethernet uses _Ethernet Cables_, which is a general reference to any cable that conforms to any of several Ethernet standards.
- Most wireless LANs rely on yet another networking device: a wireless LAN access point. The AP acts somewhat like Ethernet switch, in that all wireless LAN nodes commuicate with the wireless AP.
- The term _Ethernet_ refers to an entire family of standards. Some standards define the specifics of how to send data over a particular type of cabling, and at particular speed. Other standards define protocols or rules, that the ethernet nodes must follow to be a part of an Ethernet LAN. All these standards come from the IEEE and include the number **802.3** as the beginning of the standard name.
- The most fundamental cabling choice has to do with the materials used inside the cable for the physical transmission of bits: copper wires or glass fibers. Devices using UTP cabling transmit data over electrical circuits via the copper wires inside the cable. Fiber-optica cabling, the more expensive alternative, allows Ethernet nodes to send light over glass fibers in the center of the cable.
- [Types of Ethernet](https://postimg.cc/rDj5prN0)
- The IEEE also uses more meaningful shortcut names to identify the speed as well as a clue about whether the cabling is UTP (suffix T) or fiber (suffix X).
- Although Ethernet includes many physical layer standards, Ethernet acts like a single LAN technology because it uses the same data-link layer standard over all types of Ethernet physical links.
- While the physical layer standards focus on sending bits over a cable, the Ethernet data-link protocols focus on sending an _Ethernet frame_ from source to destination Ethernet node.
- Note that in an actual UTP cable, the wires will be twisted together, instead of being paralle. The twising helps solve some important physical transmission issues. When electrical current passes over any wire, it creates electromagnetic interference (EMI) that interferes with the electrica signals in nearby wires, including the wires in the same cable. Twisting the wire pair together helps cancel out most of the EMI, so most networking physical links that use copper wires use twisted pairs.
- The term _Ethernet link_ refers to any physical cable between two Ethernet nodes. First, think about the UTP cable itself. The cable holds some copper wires, grouped as twisted pairs. The 10BASE-T and 100BASE-T standards require two pairs of wires, while the 1000BASE-T standard require four pairs.
- Many Ethernet UTP cables use an RJ-45 connecter on the both ends. The RJ-45 connecter has eight physical locations into which the eight wires in the cable can be inserted, called _pin positions_. These pis create a place where the ends of the copper wires can touch the electronics inside the nodes at the end of the physical link so that electricity can flow.
- 10BASE-T and 100BASE-T use two pairs of wires in the UTP cable, one for each direction. For correct transmission over the link, the wires in the UTP cable must be connected to the correct pin positions in the RJ-45 connectors.
- As a rule, Ethernet NIC transmitters use the pair connected to 1 and 2; the NIC recieves use pairs at pin positions 3 and 6. LAN switches do the opposite. Their receivers use the wire pair at pins 1 and 2, and their transmitters use the wire pair at pins 3 and 6.
- To allow a PC NIC, to communicate with a switch, the UTP cable must use a _straight through cable pinout_. [straight-through-cable-pinout](https://postimg.cc/2bCc6KyQ)
- A straight throught cable works correctly when the nodes use opposite pairs for transmitting data. However, when two like devices connect to an Ethernet link, they both transmit on the same pins. In that case, you then need another type of cabling pinout called _crossover cable_. The crossover cable pinout crosses the pair at the transmit pins on each device to the receive pins on the opposite device. [crossover-cable-pinout](https://postimg.cc/w3QVM2Y2)
- logic:
    - **Crossover cable:** if the endpoints transmit on the same pair.
    - **Straight-through cable:** if the endpoints transmit on different pin pairs.
- [Summary](https://postimg.cc/f3SCbhMS)
- Cisco switches have a feature called _auto-mdix_ that notices when the wrong cable is used and automatically changes its logic to make the link work.
- The straight through cable for 1000BASE-T uses the four pair wires to create four circuits, but the pins need to match. It uses the same pinouts for two pairs as do the 10BASE-T and 100BASE-T standards and it adds a pair at pins 4 and 5 and the final pair at pins 7 and 8. [straight-through-cable](https://postimg.cc/BLrHw8Fm)
- The Gigabit Ethernet crossover cable cosses the same two pair wire pairs as the crossover cables for other types of Ethernet (pairs 1,2 and 3,6). It also cross thetwo new pairs as well (pairs 4,5 and pairs 7,8). [crossover-cable](https://postimg.cc/G8HWdp20)
- Fiber-optic cabling uses glass as the medium through which light passes, varying that light over time to encode 0s and 1s. The glass fiber by itself needs some help. The glass could break, so the glass fiber needs some protection and strengthening.
- The three outer layers of the cable protect the interior of the cable and make the cables easier to install and manage, while the inner _cladding_ and _core_ work together to create the environment to allow transmission of light over the cable. A light source, called the _optical transmitter_, shines a light into the core. Light can pass through the core; however, light reflects off the cladding back to the core. [Fiber-optic](https://postimg.cc/G8mX1gXH)
- The multimode fiber, characterized by the fact that the cable allows for multiple angles (modes) of light waves entering the core. In contrast, single-mode fiber uses smaller-diameter core, around one-fifth the diameter of common multimode cables. To transmit light into much smaller core a laser-based transmitter sends light at a single angle. [Multimode](https://postimg.cc/2qDzTh2H) [Singlemode](https://postimg.cc/626Bxwsn)
- [Comparision of UTP and Fiber](https://postimg.cc/8s9sMJQY) 
- The Ethernet data-link protocol defines the Ethernet frame: an Ethernet header at the front, the encapsulated data in the middle, and an Ethernet trailer at the end. [Ethernet Header](https://postimg.cc/njgXTM50)
- The source and destination address play a huge role in how Ethernet LANs work. Ethernet addresses, also called Media Access Control (MAC) addresses, are 6-byte (48-bits) binary numbers. Most MAC addresses represent a single NIC or other Ethernet port, so these addresses are often called a _unicast_ Ethernet address. At the time of manufacture, all Ethernet devices are assigned a universally unique MAC address.
- In addition to unicast addresses, Ethernet also uses group addresses. _Group addresses_ identify more than one LAN interface card:
    - **Broadcast address**: Frames sent to this address should be delivered to all the devices on to the Ethernet LAN. It has a value of FFFF.FFFF.FFFF
    - **Multicast address**: Frames sent to a multicast Ethernet address will be copied and forwarded to a subset of devices on the LAN that volunteers to receive frames sent to a specific multicast address.
- The Ethernet Type field plays a much less obvious role. The Ethernet Type field, or EtherType sits in the Ethernet data-link layer header, but its purpose is to directly help the network processing on routers and hosts. Basically, the Type field identifies the type of the network layer packet that sits inside the Ethernet frame. IEEE manages a list of EtherTypes values, so that every network layer protoco that needs a unique EtherType value can have a number. 
- The Ethernet Frame Check Sequence (FCS) field in the Ethernet trailer - the only field in the Ethernet trailer - gives the receiving node a way to compare results with the sender, to discover whether errors occurred in the frame.
- **Half duplex**: The device must wait to send if it is currently receiving a frame; in other words, it cannot send and receive at the same time.
- **Full duplex**: THe device does not have to wait before sending; it can send and receive at the same time.
- For all links between PCs and switches, or between switches, use full duplex. However, for any link connected to a LAN hub, the conneted LAN switch and NIC port should use half duplex.
- _Ethernet shared media_ refers to designs that use hubs require CSMA/CD, and therefore share the bandwidth. By contrast, the term _Ethernet point-to-point_ emphasizes the fact that in a network built with switches, each (point-to-point) link works independently of the others.
