# Using the Command-Line Interface

- Cisco uses the concept of a command-line interface (CLI) with its router products and most of its Catalyst LAN switch products. Cisco Catalyst switches also support other methods to both monitor and configure a switch (ex web interface). Switches ca also be controlled and operated using network management software.
- Cisco refers to a switch's physical connectors as either _interfaces_ or _ports_, with an interface type and interface number. The interface type, as used in commands on the switch, is either Ethernet, Fast Ethernet, Gigabit Ethernet, and so on for faster speeds. To uniquely number each interace some Catalyst switches use a two-digit interface numner (x/y), while other uses three-digit number (x/y/z).
- Like any other piece of computer hardware, Cisco switches need some kind of operating system software. Cisco calls this OS the Internetwork Operating System (IOS). Cisco IOS software for catalyst implements and controls logic and functions performed by a Cisco switch.
- The switch CLI can be accessed through three popular methods - the console, Telnet, and Secure Shell (ssh). Two of these methods use the IP network in which switch resides to reach the switch. The console is a physical port built specificall to allow access to the CLI. [Summary](https://postimg.cc/CZsD41wc)
- [Console connection possiblities](https://postimg.cc/5X7WQ5Cg)
- The default console port settings on a switch are as follows. Note that the last three parameters are referred to collectively as 8N1:
    - 9600 bits/second
    - No hardware flow control
    - 8-bit ASCII
    - No parity bits
    - 1 stop bit
- Telnet and SSH both allow the user to connect to another device's CLI, but instead of connecting through a console cable to the console port, the traffic flows over the same IP network that the networking devices are helping to create.
- Telnet uses the concept of a Telnet client and a Telnet server. A _Telnet client_, the device that sits in front of the user, accepts keyboard input and sends those commands  to the _Telnet server_. The Telnet server accepts the text, interprets the text as a command and replies back. Cisco catalyst switches enable a Telnet server by default, but switches need a few more configuration settings before you can successfully use Telnet to connect to a switch.
- Telnet poses a significant security risk in production networks. Telnet sends all data (including any username and password) as clear-text data. SSH gives us a much better option. SSH encrypts the contents of all messages, including the passwords, avoiding the possibility of someone capturing packets in the network and stealing the password to network devices.
- All three CLI access methods covered so far place the user in an area of CLI called _user EXEC mode_. User EXEC mode, sometimes also called _user mode_, allows the user to look around but not break anything. Cisco IOS supports a more powerful EXEC mode called _enable_ mode. Enable mode gets its name from the `enable` command, which moves the user from user mode to enable mode. The other names for this mode, _privileged mode_, refers to the fact that powerful commands can be executed there.
- If the command prompt lists the hostname followed by a `>`, the user is in user mode; if it is the hostname followed by the `#`, the user is in enable mode.
- The `reload` command tells the switch to reinitialize or reboot Cisco IOS, so IOS allows this powerful command to be used only from enable mode.
- _Configuration Mode_ is another mode for the Cisco CLI, similar to user mode and privileged mode. User mode lets you issue nondisruptive commands and displays some information. Prvileged mode supports a superset of commands compared to user mode, including commands that disrupt switch operations. However not one of those commands in user or privileged mode change the switch's configuration.
- Configuration mode accepts _configuration commands_ - commands that tell the switch the details of what to do and how to do it. Commands entered in configuration mode update the active configuration file. [Summary](https://postimg.cc/sMZzPvC7)
- Cisco switches contain random-access memory (RAM) to store data while Cisco IOS is using it, but RAM loses its contents when the switch loses power or is reloaded, To store information that must be retained when the switch loses its power or is reloaded, Cisco switches use several types of more permanent memory, none of which has moving parts. By avoiding components with moving parts, switches can maintain better uptime and availability.
- The following list details four types of memory found in Cisco switches:
    - **RAM**: Sometimes called DRAM, is used by the switch as it used by any other computer: for working storage. The running (active) configuration is stored here.
    - **Flash memory**: Either a chip inside the switch or removable memory card, flash memory stores fully functional Cisco IOS images and is the default location where the switch gets its Cisco IOS at boot time. Flash memory can also be used to store any other files, including backup copies of configuration files.
    - **ROM**: ROM stores a bootstrap program that is loaded when the swich first powers on. The bootstrap program then finds the full Cisco IOS image and manages the process of loading Cisco IOS into RAM, at which point Cisco IOS takes control over the operation of the switch.
    - **NVRAM**: NVRAM stores the initial or startup configuration file that is used when the switch is first powered on and when the switch is reloaded.
- [Command References](https://postimg.cc/zLjjkxG9)
